Written by Firdawsi in the 11th century, the Shahnama is a story told about many kings and heroes from the pre-Islamic era.
This illustration depicts a painful moment where a dear friend and a king is lost.
Reflecting this time of mourning, the sky is painted dark and windy as the clouds try to scurry away.
Nobles, ministers and loyal servants gather around the king
as they watch him present his last wishes and take his last breath.
A royal doctor sits and holds the king’s hand as he guides him towards death.
A loyal friend embraces the king reflecting a true bond.
Those guilty of murder and treason against the king sit at the bottom,
signifying their loss of status.
Forming a circle around the king, there is a sense of unity, love and respect
presented on the behalf of everyone as they wait for death to come.
While it was a victorious moment for the kingdom through the defeat of their enemy,
King Dara was left injured with a stab wound in his chest.
King Dara lies in the middle of the image, wearing red, as his close friend Sikander, wearing light blue, holds him.
The powerful bond between the friends is shown, as a tear-filled Sikander holds Dara’s head on his lap.
And with his hands, Sikander removes Dara’s crown and armor from his body and places at his feet.
Scared of losing his friend, Sikander begins to tell Dara to be strong and to
find the strength and courage to sit upon the horse once again.
19 --
Sikander explained the immense amount of pain he was going through since discovering
Dara’s injury in battle. Dara said to Sikander “Death is much more nearer to me than the throne.”
Accepting that death was close, Dara praises his allies gained from his kingship and wealth.
Dara acknowledges his arms, troops, noble steed, throne and crown.
As Dara approaches his last breath, Dara tells Sikander his last wishes in front of the loyalists as a witness.
Dara asked for the protection of his children and his beloved wife.
Dara wished that his only daughter, Rushanak, to be married  and to share the throne with her husband in happiness.
In wedlock, she would give birth to a son to be named Asfandiyar, who would be the successor to the throne.
Dara wanted this prince to bring back the Glory and Faith of the good days.
Dara believed the next generation of rulers could bring back prosperity and growth
to the kingdom. Sikander gracefully accepted Dara’s wishes and Dara passes.
Dara is buried in a charnel-house draped with jewellery, golden brocade and a golden throne.
During the burial, there was no dry eye mourning the death of their king.
While this image depicts pain for the loss of their king,
there is also a reflection of those guilty of murder.
In turn, this illustration presents the two men wearing blue and yellow at the bottom,
guilty of crimes against King Dara. The men guilty of murder
were loyal ministers of the king. Now they kneel at the feet of the dying king,
stripped of their turbans and armour with their hands cuffed to their backs,
reflecting their loss of status in the kingdom.
Sikander’s emotions of loss fueled his desire for revenge.
He spoke of justice from those that committed the act against their king.
Sikander’s notion of revenge and protection of the kingdom led the nobles to
hail Sikander “as the ruler of the earth.”
And thus, the death of a precious king led Sikander on a new journey.